# Changelog

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Upcoming release

### Added
- Introduced new functionality to the `xlsxreport` console script.
  - The command for generating a formatted Excel file is now `xlsxreport compile`.
  - Added an option to open the compiled Excel file using the `--reveal` flag.
  - The `xlsxreport appdir` command now reveals the location of the app directory.
  - Setting up the app directory can be accomplished with `xlsxreport appdir --setup`
    which creates the app directory and copies default report template files.
- The `ReportTemplate` class serves as the representation of a YAML template file in
  Python. It provides methods for both loading a YAML template file and saving to a
  YAML template file.
- The `validate` module offers functions for validating the file integrity, data types,
  and content of a YAML template file or a ReportTemplate instance.

### Changed
- Introduced a new public interface for reading a template file, applying the template
  to a table (which now creates compiled table sections), and for writing compiled table
  sections to an Excel worksheet.
- Changed how the `xlsxreport` console scripts works. Now all scripts are called with
  `xlsxreport` and a specific command.
- Renamed Excel worksheet generated by the `xlsxreport compile` script from "Proteins" 
  to "Report".
- (!) Replaced the term "config" with "template" throughout the codebase.
- (!) Replaced the template keyword "groups" with "sections" in yaml template files.
- (!) Replaced the template keyword "args" with "settings" in yaml template files.
- Changed the default value of the "evaluate_log2_transformation" setting to False.
- Changed the default value of the "write_supheader" setting to False.
- Supheader cells are now merged even when no supheader name is specified.
- Attempting to use an invalid format for compiling an Excel report will now apply no
  format and emit a warning instead of raising an Exception. This change was introduced
  to provide a similar behaviour for conditional formats and formats.
- When attempting to use an invalid format for compiling an Excel report, the compiler
  will now apply no format and issue a warning instead of raising an exception. This
  change ensures consistent behavior for both conditional and standard cell formats.
  This change is also reflected in the validation module. When an invalid format
  description is identified, it now creates an error with an error level ERROR instead
  of CRITICAL, indicating that the template could still be utilized to create an Excel
  format despite the encountered issue.

### Removed
- (!) Removed the `cassiopeia_report` command line script.
- (!) Removed the `xlsxreport_setup` script.
- (!) Removed `xlsxreport.writer.Datasheet` and `xlsxreport.writer.Reportbook`, which
  previously represented the public interface for creating a formatted Excel report. 

### Internal
- Replaced the `appdirs` library with `platformdirs`, as `appdirs` is officially
  deprecated.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 0.0.8 - Refactoring and new settings

### Changed
- `groups` in the yaml config file with the setting "border: True" will now always have
  a thick border line in the written Excel file (which is a border type 2 in Excel).
- NaN entries are now always written as an empty string to the Excel file.

### Added
- Added additional parameters to the settings (`args`) section of the yaml config file,
  which allow to control behaviors that were previously applied by default.
  - `write_supheader` (default: True), determines if a supheader row will be written.
  - `evaluate_log2_transformation` (default: True), if True values are evaluated before
    applying a log2 transformation to `groups` that have the "log2: True" setting.
  - `remove_duplicate_columns` (default: True), if True columns that were already used
    in a compiled `group` are removed from subsequent groups.
  - `add_autofilter` (default: True), if True adds an Excel auto filter to header row.
  - `freeze_cols` (default: 1), if larger than 0 applies freeze pane to the Excel file.
    The selected row for freezing will always be the header row, the selected column
    corresponds to the specified value.
- Added additional settings to `groups` in the yaml config file.
  - "hide_section: True" results in sections being hidden in the Excel file.
  - A "conditional" setting can now be added to "feature" groups, which allows applying
    a conditional format to all columns of the group. 

### Removed
- (!) Removed parameters `border_weight` and `nan_symbol` from the settings (`args`)
  section of the yaml config file.

### Internal
- Changed the build config file to `pyproject.toml`.
- Added extensive unit testing.
- Added an integration test for generating a formatted Excel file.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 0.0.7 - Fix comparison group issue

### Fixes
  - Fixes a mix up of columns in comparison groups that was caused when an experiment 
    comparison was the exact substring of another, for example "exp1 vs exp2" and
    "exp3exp1 vs exp2".

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 0.0.6 - Fix missing supheader

### Fixes
  - Supheader not being written when a block contains only one column.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 0.0.5 - Improvements for MsReport report generation

### Changed
- (!) Renamed console script "xlsx_report" to "xlsxreport"
- (!) Renamed console script "xlsx_report_setup" to "xlsxreport_setup"
- Columns retrieved for "Sample group" blocks now must contain the group tag and a
  sample name. Columns not containing a sample name are ignored. For example, using the
  tag "Intensity" will no longer include columns such as "Intensity" or
  "Intensity total".
- Renamed the "qtable_proteins.yaml" config file to "msreport_lfq_protein.yaml"
- Updated "msreport_lfq_protein.yaml" config file
  - Changed columns in the "protein_features" block
  - Changed comparison group tag from "logFC" to "Ratio [log2]"
  - Added new format for "Ratio [log2]"
  - Changed formatting of the quantified_events block  
- Updated console ouput for the "xlsxreport_setup" console script.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 0.0.4 - Group and hide remaining columns

- Changes behavior of the "append_remaining_columns" option. Now the
  unspecified columns that are added to the end of the excel sheet
  are grouped and hidden.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 0.0.3 - Installation fix

- Fixes issues of missing .yaml config files for installation.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 0.0.2 - Adds remaining columns to report

- Added option to add all unspecified columns to the end of the excel sheet.
- Added documentation of the config file format.
- The config file argument "remove_tag" does not affect comparison groups
  anymore, as the sample comparison string is now always removed from the
  header and added to the supheader.
- Minor changes to the default config files.
- The xlsx_report_setup script now prints its progress to the console.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 0.0.1 - First functional version

- Initial unstable version of XlsxWriter
